---
title: Developer
date: 2021-07-14 06:02:29 Z
categories:
- news
tags:
- unordered
layout: post
img: developer.jfif
shortdesc: A web developer is a programmer who specializes in, or is specifically
  engaged in, the development of World Wide Web applications using a client–server
  model.
---

Nature of employment
Web developers are found working in various types of organizations, including large corporations and governments, small and medium-sized companies, or alone as freelancers. Some web developers work for one organization as a permanent full-time employee, while others may work as independent consultants, or as contractors for an agency or at home personal use. Web developers typically handle both server-side and front-end logic. This usually involves implementing all the visual elements that users see and use in the web applications or use, as well as all the web services that are necessary to power the usage of their developing work. Salaries vary depending on the type of development work, location, and level of seniority.

Type of work performed
Modern web applications often contain three or more tiers, and depending on the size of the team a developer works on, he or she may specialize in one or more of these tiers - or may take a more interdisciplinary role. A web developer is usually classified as a Front-end web development or a Back-End Web Developer. For example, in a two-person team, one developer may focus on the technologies sent to the client such as HTML, JavaScript, CSS, ReactJs or AngularJS and on the server-side frameworks (such as Perl, Python, Ruby, PHP, Java, ASP, ASP.NET, Node.js) used to deliver content and scripts to the client. Meanwhile, the other developer might focus on the interaction between server-side frameworks, the webserver, and a database system. Further, depending on the size of their organization, the aforementioned developers might work closely with a content creator/copywriter, marketing adviser, user experience designer, web designer, web producer, project manager, software architect, or database administrator - or they may be responsible for such tasks as web design and project management themselves.

Educational and licensure requirements
There are no formal educational or licensure requirements to become a web developer. However, many colleges and trade schools offer coursework in web development. There are also many tutorials and articles, which teach web development, freely available on the web - for example Basic JavaScript

Even though there are no formal educational requirements, dealing with web developing projects requires those who wish to be referred to as web developers to have advanced knowledge/skills in:

HTML/XHTML, CSS, JavaScript and jQuery.
Server/client side architecture like all or some of the above mentioned.
Programming/Coding/Scripting in one of the many server-side languages or frameworks (e.g., Perl, Python, Ruby, PHP, Go, CFML - ColdFusion, Java, ASP, ASP.NET, Node.js)
Ability to utilize a database
Creating single page application with use of front-end tools such as EmberJS,[1] ReactJS[2] or AngularJS
